JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: A new study
by one of the nation's biggest
health insurance companies
provides a startling
look at the toll that
prescription opioids are
taking on its policy-holders.
William Brangham has that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The insurance
giant Blue Cross Blue Shield
analyzed medical records
for 30 million of its customers.
And it found some
striking results.
In 2015, roughly 20 percent of
their customers, one in five,
filled at least one prescription
for opioid painkillers.
Almost half of those patients
were prescribed high doses of
those drugs, which are more
likely to cause dependence.
And, indeed, between 2010 and
2016, the rate of abuse or
addiction to those painkillers
shot up dramatically by almost
500 percent, this while the
rate of medically assisted
treatment, considered the
most successful way to curb
those addictions, grew by just
65 percent in the
same time frame.
The report also detailed
differences in opioid
abuse between men and
women and among different
parts of the country.
For more on this, I'm joined
now by Dr. Trent Haywood.
He's the chief medical
officer for the Blue Cross
Blue Shield Association.
Welcome to the "NewsHour."
This is a very, very interesting
set of data that you have
produced from your patients'
records.
We have said one in five have
had a prescription for these
painkillers, obviously, most of
them for very legitimate
pain-suppression needs.
But we have also discovered
here that the rate of
addiction has shot up.
Why do you think that
has been happening?
DR.
TRENT HAYWOOD, Chief Medical
Officer, Blue Cross Blue Shield
Association: Well, one of
the things, the reason
why we wanted to focus
on this particular
issue is just what you
just alluded to, the escalation
in the opioid addiction from
physicians prescribing these
particular opioids.
Starting in the '90s, we really
went aggressive as physicians
making sure that we address
pain.
Unfortunately, it was found out
later, as we are starting to see
unfold now, we underestimated
the risk related to that
particular high doses
of prescribing those
particular opioids.
And now we are suffering
the consequences of that.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Some of this
data that you guys have put
together, it is not necessarily
new news.
Why hasn't the message seemingly
gotten out to the medical
community just how serious
these drugs really are?
DR.
TRENT HAYWOOD: Well, one of
the things that we know when
it comes to medicine and the
practice of medicine is that it
really requires a substantial
amount of time for it to change.
We're headed into the
independence holiday,
and so people are
moving off to make sure
that they enjoy times with
their friends and family, but
as this report highlights, all
of us won't necessarily be
independent this particular
day, because whether it be your
family, whether it be your
neighbor's family or whether it
be someone down the block, we're
all struggling with this
issue of opioid addiction.
Over two million Americans
each year are suffering
from this opioid addiction.
And what is key about that
particular aspect is that it's
not one specific demographic.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
treatments, the best-known
treatments for these
addictions have barely
kept up with the pace.
Why do you think that is?
DR.
TRENT HAYWOOD: We're talking
about someone moving from what
would normally would be an
acute situation to
a chronic condition.
And so this opioid addiction
is a chronic condition and
we need to treat it that way.
We need to make certain
these people are not
only in treatment, but
they have the necessary
support for the chronic
condition that they have.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: If I am a
policy holder of Blue Cross
Blue Shield and I recognize
that I have a substance problem,
and I come and I try to get
treatment for that, will
my policy cover that
addiction treatment?
DR.
TRENT HAYWOOD: Yes.
So, one of the reasons why we're
highlighting this is because
you -- actually make certain
that you follow up at
your local plan level
to get that treatment.
So, this is something that
is actually covered in
most members' policies.
And so you absolutely
should be following up
to get that treatment.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: One of the
things I was also struck by
in your report is the gender
differences.
It seemed that younger -- when
the genders are younger, when
men and women are younger,
men seem to be more vulnerable.
But as we age, women
seem to become more
vulnerable to addiction.
Do you have a sense
of why that is?
DR.
TRENT HAYWOOD: One of the
reasons why we think women are
being impacted as we get into an
older age group is the fact that
they're appropriately following
up with their physicians.
If you think about it, the
more that you are following
up, the more likely that you're
going to be
prescribed an opioid.
And so we're seeing women are
actually at an accelerated
pace the more that we get into
the older age groups.
And so that's the correlation
that you're seeing, why women
would necessarily be higher,
because they are more
predisposed to actually
getting that prescribed opioid.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: At the very
moment we're talking, the
Senate is debating a health care
bill that could eliminate
hundreds of billions of
dollars from Medicaid.
Medicaid itself pays for
much of addiction treatment
around the country.
Do you share concern of many
that, if this bill were to
become law, that this -- those
cuts to Medicaid
could only worsen an
already awful epidemic?
DR.
TRENT HAYWOOD: From every
indication, this particular
issue is not partisan at all.
So, whether you're on the
right or on the left, what we
have understood is, as relates
to the opioid epidemic, both
sides of the aisle are eager
to be able to address that
particular concern.
And so, while there may
be broader implications
as it relates to health
care reform, on this
particular topic, I think we
all stand together as Americans.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: All
right, Dr. Trent Haywood,
chief medical officer of
Blue Cross Blue Shield,
thank you so much.
DR.
TRENT HAYWOOD: Thank you.